Can I interrupt with some very happy news?
Sure.
You know, your book went on sale on the 6th of November.
And Barnes & Noble counts their sales in weekly cycles, which ended on the 7th.
In two days, your book is the best-selling book in Barnes & Noble countrywide.
Two days compared to a week for everything else.
Well, I was down at the Strand this morning, and Fred Bass is selling your book, and he said he sold 128 copies on Friday.
Friday.
And he's selling it.
The board in Atlanta said they sold hundreds.
There were not that many people who were waiting out in the chill at midnight, but they have sold hundreds.
They don't even know how many.
But anyway, congratulations.
I'll let you go to it.
Thanks.
That must make you feel pretty good.
Well, it does.
Maybe, uh,
But still my overwhelming feeling is relief.
That thing took so long.
It was really criminal.
It shouldn't happen that way.
I disagree.
I think it appears to me to be a work that had to be leisurely.
I'm just so admiring of lovely accomplishments.
Well, thank you.
Most of the real writing took place in the last year.
before publication.
I sense that because there are resonances of things that are going on right now, you know.
No, I... It had been the first time the internet had put its mangy pause into the news with Matt Drudge.
Great.
I think I said, ha, this gives me an idea.
I've always said that all books are written in six months.
and that the rest is dancing around the project.
I love that.
And I lied, this took a year, but it was 740 pages.
It shouldn't be that way.
What, did you have a sense of the story over it, throughout the point of the course of the research, though?
Well, I had the basic story, but I made a colossal blunder, or I was a costly lady.
I knew I'd wanted to include plantations in South Georgia because I'd seen them for the first time and I'd never seen anything like it.
They're such unbelievable forms of conspicuous consumption.
There's nothing else like them.
I used to think the private jet was about as big as conspicuous consumption gets.
But they have these 15, 20, 25, 30,000 acre plantations just for shooting quail 13 weeks out of the year.
$4,500 per quail.
Right, exactly.
And they have to claim to fly them back and forth from Atlanta or wherever.
Anyway, I made the mistake of saying, okay, I'm going to have a man who owns a plantation, but he's going to live in New York, you know, the Atlanta developer who made a pig and he wants to be in New York and get very, really big time.
And I struggled with this concept in years.
Really?
And until I realized that if,
The plantations were so intriguing.
The book really had to be in Atlanta, so that's where people come from.
Some from Birmingham, but mostly Atlanta.
It only came to you in the last year or so?
It came to me in... Really?
Well, it actually came to me in November of 95.
And I'm astonished.
I was having lunch with Jonathan Galassi, who's my editor at Starstruck.
And I turned in about 800 pages of manuscript.
All about New York.
Except for the plantation students, you know, a few scenes in California, because I already had this character, Conrad, in mind.
You had Conrad in mind.
I didn't mind from the beginning.
I didn't know I was going to deal with him, but I didn't mind.
That probably explains why I don't know what, I had no idea what he was there for until he performed the function.
Well, if I could have gotten him together with Charlie Sooner, I would have, but it just wasn't possible.
You did better?
So I was having lunch with Jonathan, and I started telling him some stories of things that I'd run across, and of course I was working on this thing.
And they were all about Atlanta.
And I, because I'd been there a number of times for the plantation business, and I said to him, you know, sometimes I wish I had set this book in Atlanta instead of New York.
And he was, I was missing the beat, says, well, why don't you?
This is November of 19th, so with that kind of seal of approval, I started in January of 1906, researching Atlantian artists.
And I started rewriting it, I think, in a Atlanta book, in the late spring of really the summer of 1911.
And the whole thing was selling the place to eat.
I'd always wanted to use Freaknik somehow, which nobody's ever written about.
That's a real thing, right?
Yeah, absolutely.
I never heard of it.
And my description, in fact, is kind of mild compared to what really goes on in Freaknik.
The Vyde magazine had a culture spread of Freaknik.
of the 1997 frequency, an issue not that long ago.
And the real thing was much wilder than I would have dared be in mine, since the crisis was quite real.
And once I had quick makes sense, I said, I've got to have the black-white politics of the mind.
And then I somehow, I don't know how I thought of Roger, too white to, as a lawyer, but I thought of him.
And I was really feeling great.
Finally, got all the pieces in place.
I had a plot.
I knew it would work.
And I had a heart attack.
You had a heart attack?
Yeah.
This was in August of my next day.
And I had a huge bypass operation.
And it was November, early November, before I was ready to do things.
And I went into a period of absolute glory.
Usually bypass the patient's death depression.
It's very common.
I was before it.
I wrote so much I couldn't believe it.
I stayed until 2 or 3 o'clock in the morning, my wife begging me to save my strength instead.
You can't punish yourself this way.
Ah, never mind.
And I wrote this novella.
called Ambush at Fort Bragg.
It was the stuff that was New York City, which I was nailed as taken out of the book.
And I had, you know, maybe 35 pages of this thing.
So it kind of had 180 pages of it.
And it became a novella in France and Spain.
I presume it will be published here eventually, but the paragraph didn't want to bring out a short book before.
Is it related at all to this?
No.
It was, the book was going to start with an old co-log in which you're in the, it's two o'clock in the morning, you're in the control, the control room of a, of a network television.
That's other network.
And it's about to produce a star of another kind of thing.
And I also wrote a, in the same period before you, I wrote an 8,000 word piece about neuroscience.
I'm a neuroscience prophet.
I love to follow all the, I think, fabulous piece in the time this morning.
After you've seen the thing.
I wrote down this morning from NASA.
Right.
And there's a piece about an experiment done at Emory University of Atlanta with
about testosterone levels.
Oh, that's all that was interesting to me.
I looked at monkeys before the AFAC.
I had never been so happy in my life.
It was very strange.
And I was aggressive, and I'm not aggressive.
I was shaking my fist at people in traffic, and they all give way, because they could do nothing worse than a nut in New York.
And I chewed out a doctor,
not realizing I had an appointment with him.
And I would never raise my voice to a doctor.
And it turned out he was right.
I was, you know, I was a week early.
And he kept saying, will you come right on there?
I'm going to, uh, sometimes it's really nice to have a pre-examination.
He was just going to get his nut out of it right now.
But also I was still happy.
Then came the crash.
That was in mid-January of 97.
And I'd never had depression, but I had one before.
I didn't know what it was at first.
It was certainly, everything's going to go wrong.
There's no way you can finish up with anything else if you want to do.
Your mind is in the constant turmoil.
What is Charlie's depression there, as you can say?
I grew up on him.
I don't experience it.
I'm feeling sorry.
Horrible.
And I finally called a old friend of mine who had to do a heavy psychiatry at John Hopkins.
And he kind of, he was on the phone with me the other day for a day.
And one of those weeks, literally, and he kind of scared me out of it.
And then I started writing again.
And it was late in June, 1997.
from there up to the middle of college this year.
I don't think I've ever turned out as much stuff in my life.
I don't want to have to ever do it that way again, because... Do you rewrite much, or is it pretty... No, I rewrite a lot.
Can I tell you, there's a formula that you have one typo in here that you ought to fix.
What's that?
Identify the LexisNexis database.
That's N-E-X-I-S, N-E-X-I-S.
you spell it like the car every year yeah i don't know i'll find out what pages of it it's where lodger is checking out charlie i know you're a stickler for it yeah no i know there'll be multiple editions so you're right here you know i i i have a lexus nexus account i'm sorry no no i think if there are any typos or misspellings it's my fault i really pushed them i'll eventually check that but they are very good about checking out usually it's usually not a house where you find
I'm probably the only one in the world that you thought of that.
When you talk about re-writing, I kept re-writing chapters after that, or when you put into the handbook.
And they found that, yeah, I don't see that many repetitions and stuff.
It really is about peace.
Well, I put it in the book of 820-odd pages, and I started to do like a cut.
And I really could.
There were so many cases where I... Do you mind if I shoot a couple pictures?
No, no.
I'd repeat things.
But I think it's tight, really tight.
Really, I mean, even in terms of using the same words over it, it's superannuated.
I think you only use twice.
I love that word.
Oh, I discovered that at the age of 16.
Super-graduated?
You love it.
Yeah.
I'm Charles Lamb wrote an essay.
Oh, I'm a super-graduated man.
Oh, yeah, it's wonderful.
Oh, I'm a great Lamb fan.
I'll send a copy of it if I can find it.
I know it from college decades.
It's a wonderful word.
I love it.
I've been citing his dissertation on what he did.
Wow.
That's my...
metaphor or conceit for the typical novelist today who evows the first 25 years of his life as material and has probably a wonderful first novel.
Then the second novel has only two more years.
It's a cannibalized.
And he's like the farmer who burns his house down over and over to get some more of those pigs.
But after a while the rest of the stairs will diminish return.
It really shocks me that you just came up with the Atlanta focus in the last couple of years, because I think my opening question would have been, do you see this book as a companion volume to Bonfire, in a way, which was in New York City and now they're going into the Southern Metropolis?
And do you?
I mean, let me offer that as a question.
Do you see it as a companion volume, as a continuation of some of the themes that you explored?
Now, I never, honestly, never thought of it that way, and I knew fairly early on that I wanted to introduce a religious element, but it had to be a modern religious element.
Nietzsche, who, no matter what you think of his overall philosophy, turned out to be a great prophet, because he prophesied the spread of atheism.
And he prophesied the world wars of the 20th century, so the 20th century would be a century wars.
Catastrophic beyond all imagination.
And he, for this period, he predicted a period of, what do you call it, a transvaluation or revaluation, in which people were desperately searching for new sets of values to be placed
the old Christian values that were dominant in the world for so long.
And he said, there wouldn't be a lot of people utilizing, resurrecting old religions, and he said, none of it will work.
Because unless you honestly believe that there is some superior being that's more powerful and important than you are, it's not going to happen.
and also that the superior being makes us human beings a completely different order from the beast of the field.
Anyway, he said, this would be that period.
And so I was intrigued, I was wondering if you think the sternest religious doctrine ever developed sources, which has a certain influence on Christianity's part, and places in modern-day America
If you do a recent take in that book, it's the year 2000, if you look at kind of that age and how long you've done this and that.
I had to put it ahead so you'd get rid of the tenant from the area of Atlanta and put in a meeting.
Nobody would need to care about that.
Well, I think it helps.
It eliminates some possible problems, too, or anything.
Right now.
I would love to be able to be a steward, but I know very well that I'm not ready.
But I thought that a man like Charlie Crooker might be receptive to it if he's in a sufficiently weakened state and I have nothing else to hang on to.
And he doesn't even have his wife to hang on to because she's just not for better or for worse than the man.
And you really can't count on his friends because they're just career friends.
They're his friends because he's a big timer and they're a big time.
Would this sufficiently prepare a man for Epictetus and a religion of the first century A.D.?
?
Now, there are those I've read in the years who do not buy this ending.
You know, I was reading this book when I was in the ruins of Ephesus, by the way.
Oh, really?
Yeah, it's a charm.
This book is resonating for me, even surrounded by these ancient pagans, you know.
I'm sorry, go ahead.
No, no, no, no.
I'm glad to go to this picture of the book.
Well, go ahead.
I love the ending makes sense to me.
I like the ending.
I mean, a couple of the reviewers have said probably not how to end this novel.
I liked it perfectly, really.
I mean, in the epilogue, you don't tell us about Serena, but that's obvious.
She's gone.
I hint that she's gone.
It's obvious that she's gone.
She's gone.
She's for better and for better.
I mean, that's...
And as the mayor puts it, I don't think Mrs. Croker believes that the sweet things... I believe that Mrs. Croker believes the sweet things is why we end when we die.
None of the critics have suggested that really Charlie becomes a full man at the end.
I think.
And maybe you have more.
No, no.
At whose salvation he becomes a man in full.
He becomes a man in full.
Of course, you introduced that phrase on page five or six.
And then really, it only makes sense to me when he does, however lame-brained it is, it makes sense.
I mean, he's gone through the wall of fire.
He's gone through the wall of fire.
Is it a satire, any of you?
No.
I've seen a few people call it satire.
I have always hated the word satire, even for the bonfire advantage of anything else, because to me, I realize this is not the dictionary definition, but to me, satire is the truth taken to an extreme for the sake of mockery.
Of course, the dictionary just says it's a satire that's a piece of writing that dwells on the foibles of mankind.
Well, I would hope that all novels,
But anyway, these satires are kind of a limiting thing.
And certainly the religious part of this book, at least in my mind, is not at all satirical.
There's a little soul-searching that goes on here among Conrad, by Conrad and by.
By yourself, too.
I thought a lot about these things.
Clearly, you've considered your own mortality in recent months.
Yes, that you can be sure of.
And what's interesting about realizing your mortality, really feeling it, when you're young, you just cannot conceive of it.
It's a real instruction.
is to know that we all have a finite time on this earth.
And we are, as Epictetus says, just a bowl of clay with a quart of blood, and that eventually we have to give it back.
And I think that should set the soul at ease.
You know, I'm 55.
You're a kid.
Well, this is internally, and you have followed a certain generation through the decades, you know, and all of a sudden, we've got these guys in my 50s and 60s, and all of a sudden, you do realize that you are definitely a lot older, and out of it, when I was walking in Thessaloniki, the last day,
There are 70,000 students at this Aristotle University, and they must have all been having coffee one day down in Mississippi.
All these thousands of kids, sunglasses on the kids, all the cell phones, drinking coffee.
And I said, I look to these kids like I must be 100 years old.
There's no way that Twain could ever meet in any kind of... And I'm wondering, are you kind of... Is this a commentary for this?
this generation seems to be approaching, this, uh, yeah, the sixteenth century.
I know myself, not because of any sexual escapades, but I know myself that at 55, I did feel like I was a kid.
I was maybe 27 or 8.
And I would, I looked
very young.
I always had them in my life, but very young.
And I still looked very young.
Even at 57, I can remember the pictures taken right after the Bonfire of Andrews came out.
But it's only a threat.
It's just a threat.
It's not a cable.
And it's going to snap.
And it does.
It snaps.
And I had, you know,
Before I had a heart attack, I was such a guy who was exercising all the time.
Really, probably not aerobically enough, but I was exercising.
And I had to become a body snob.
I see a guy who's pulling, but they can't.
And I say, yeah, you're going to fall down and die next week.
And I was going to fell down next week.
Because you talked about definitions of the phrases.
Poor Martha has gone off to the workout studio and killing herself.
That's right.
to get her body to look like a boy with breasts and everything.
These freighters really do get them, and they really catch her.
That is one of the... I've seen in my lifetime the... I just tried to get those heads with green.
The feminine ideal has changed.
It used to be a phrase that was highly complimentary because she's a voluptuous woman.
That meant bless you.
It felt like a brick.
And now, that look upon it is grossly overweight, and it's in my eye.
It probably says something about where I am in the class.
It's here, you're 55 now.
And suddenly there is this look, and you see it everywhere, even in the pages of magazines.
of this look of, sometimes these boys with breasts, slim hips, slim waist, and even a slightly big widening torso, wide shoulders, with these two hooters somehow built into the picture.
If you look at some of the old pornography, it was pretty tame compared to what's around today.
I have these barbells.
A lot can be learned through the history of pornography, I guess.
Things which you explored in Bonfire and again in Sex, of course, Race, the Cupcake Syndrome, I don't know if you call it Cupcake Syndrome, but could you comment a little bit on that?
I think the second wife
I guess you called it a cupcake in the first book.
I did use it.
I know I did use a cupcake somewhere.
A French pastry or something like that.
The new cookies.
It was something like that.
The racial thing comes up in both.
But it's different.
It's middle class black.
The Clarence Thomas thing is
right on the button because everybody in America couldn't believe all these extraordinarily articulate people who didn't speak with a trace of dialect.
And that obviously played on your perception of how to develop this as well.
I became intrigued once I said I wanted to read this book about Atlanta.
I just have to learn something about the black white politics of Atlanta.
And then you do realize that
in politics in Atlanta are people who are basically black professionals, well-educated, and there really isn't much difference between them and white politicians, except the fact that they are much more attuned to, well, it's not true anymore.
But that's not true.
The White House is a team that also in a place like Atlanta, or a place like in New York, particularly Atlanta, that his leadership is Black.
So I took a chance on going inside the mind of a Black lawyer, because I still was, as it was.
This is almost as Roger's book.
I mean, it's Charlie's book.
But Roger really does emerge as someone develops.
He definitely goes from point A to point B to point C. And he is on the brink of one in premier in Atlanta at the end.
He's got the buzz now.
He's definitely got the buzz.
Well, I hadn't noticed this conflict within a lot of various
whether you get a black professional, they have, they are in a good position to make it within a predominant white world.
They have law, of medicine, whatever.
At the same time, they feel guilty about not stopping along the way to help the black underclass.
And it's a constant tug of war.
finally gets his own salvation when he takes on, reluctantly, the Ferry's famine case.
Did this come early on in the gestation period of the small thing?
Not until I finally—it was the spring of 96.
I mean, wait a minute.
Yeah, spring of 96.
But I began—see, I had to have the political question now.
If you write about series today, in an honest way, you really have to write about race and have mystery.
You can't avoid it, I think.
When we had our interview in 1979, I guess it was when the white stuff came up.
And you were kind of saying, what's up next?
Well, I'm thinking we'll do a novel about, and Trollope, you were talking about, you were thinking a lot about Vanity Fair of New York, and you did that.
Yeah.
And that was your first leap into fiction.
You know, I hadn't cared about it.
I went on to, when I was in college, that Washington and Reagan was in it.
I assumed that every other aspiring young writer, that the novel would be the form I would see.
But then I went to work on newspapers, and it began to be exciting just to do things in nonfiction.
because it's a literary form, in the words, kind of where the Gage and Reese was doing things like that.
Yeah, you read all the stuff and you admired yourself.
Well, I was, you're out of the pipe.
Well, actually, it was when I saw what Gage and Reese could do.
It was on the Times, I was on the Hill Street, and I said, I've got to get my act together.
And it was all done through reporting.
You couldn't do the stuff without reporting.
It was done through reporting.
Exactly.
I mean, I, the message that I,
trying to keep sending out into the literary world, and we could never listen to it, is that reporting is the heart, should be the heart of a modern novel.
In a way, it always was.
You have to think of Zola, Balzac, to the extent that he'd go through the recording.
And that, in successful writing,
The content, the material you get, is about 70 percent of the successful growth, and talent is about 30 percent.
When you're young, you think that talent is 95 percent, so that's all you've got.
And material is 5 percent.
You recognize you have to write about something, but I think the older you get, the more you realize it's material and its structure, it's not pretty simple.
My three paragraphs.
It's fabulous.
I've tried the plumsiest writer, perhaps whoever I published, the material was great and instinctively great.
And you can't resist it.
You kind of blackened it to death with the plumsiest prose.
Did you actually witness a speck?
Yeah, I did.
I certainly did.
And it was presented as entertainment, just the way I do it in a book.
with these women as well as me.
Could you feel the sexual energy, though?
I mean, the way you've witnessed this, it's brilliant.
It's one of the great sex scenes that I've read in the last 20 years, brilliant.
Because it's, I mean, you can smell it from the horn, but I mean, they're all very uneasy by what they've seen, and they can't really identify what they feel from this, and they're mainly cracking jokes.
Yeah, everyone thought it was a crack joke.
And they're pretty funny jokes, but it's context.
Yeah, the power of what they did.
They're shot by what they did.
I was shot.
And you could feel the birds move.
They were two, they were one-time, almost one-time.
And they collied.
BAM!
And the rest of you have a guy who's shot.
And there's a spear that's in there.
You think he's going to get killed.
The guider?
Whatever you call it.
Queen Mary, I think Elizabeth was talking about a song, the men on the sides had pulled down, trying to keep him right there.
And where did you see this at?
At this plantation that you visited?
It was, I had gone to, this was a plantation of a developer, but it was not any of the first ones I had gone to.
And I wouldn't have been there 60 years as a developer, I wasn't really trying to learn more about the plantation, I was trying to learn about the real estate.
We had a lot of guests and wanted to give everybody a good time one day when we went shooting.
And the other way, I then went to a horse breather from I know in Long Island.
And he told me what I had just seen.
I mean, I didn't know why that little guy was in there, fooling around with this enormous thing.
And so I had a little technical guidance there with me.
And also that thing with the teaser.
That's how it works.
That's how it works, there's a question mark there.
That's, yeah, as far as I know, it's all there.
Now when you see something like that, do you know instantly that that, you don't know how it's going to get into the book, but it has to get into the book down in your moment or so?
And it's kind of a highway.
Well, you know this dude, I'm sure, that when you're a reporter,
you can be asking a lot of questions, and most of it is just rolling at your ears, and then, you know, they're responding to responses, and then finally there's something, you haven't even thought it out logically, but it happens all the time.
You know you can use it.
Well, it was one of those.
Happened up on Mount Baptist last week, I mean, they made me go to church for four and a half hours, you know, in the Gaffin, it's very anamorphosis.
these churches are a thousand years old and it's not like a regular church when you sit around here and it's extraordinary frescoes and eyebrows but it's the middle of night and the candles look out there so long and all of a sudden the sun came up and came through the windows and you could see the sun coming up and it started revealing these extraordinary frescoes and that to me was was as powerful as you know
the religious, the spiritual stuff that was going on, and I said, in some way this gets, I use this.
I don't know how relevant it is to what I'm doing, but this is pretty powerful stuff, the way the light finally started to reveal all of these things that were just in shadow for the last few hours.
I'm sorry to go off on that.
No, no, no, no.
That's why you travel 5,000 miles to get epiphanous movements like this, I guess.
Did you have your camera?
I'm not inside the church, you can't shoot, but I shot, uh, easily, uh, .
That's a great image, though, of light coming through, and that, uh, just, you hear them.
You've heard about the, you know, the, the, the show at Thessaloniki, The Treasures of Mount Apple, so this is all that stuff, in situ, you know?
Really, really something.
I'm sorry to go on.
No, I, I love it.
Um, uh,
where you can talk about the trophy wives syndrome and stuff like that and the race and the sex.
This is still very much a part of our social, the fabric of American social life.
Yes, to me it is.
This piece, incidentally, in the time this morning about the monkeys gives them further credence to a neuroscientific finding of a couple of years ago that
the male of the human species is a polygamous, is genetically polygamous by nature, and that nothing can be done about it.
And it says that, this article based on the research of the monkey says that just for a male to see certain parts of the female anatomy will not only arouse him, it will build up his testosterone
And the higher testosterone levels you have, the more confident you are, and the better you feel about life in general.
You described that with the horse.
Yeah.
He gets a very big eyeful.
I mean, yeah, I think it's testosterone.
It's working.
It's working over time.
I'm sorry.
No, no.
So Trollope, I would say, is a kind of a
In my case it would be Zola.
Zola.
I know that in certain ways I'm not much like Zola.
Zola writes very funny scenes, but he doesn't play them for laughs.
They're, they become serious.
He doesn't think they're anything funny.
But his technique of, he used to call it documents.
He'd go after the mind.
You go out to the mines and go down in the mine shafts and get the tail for a gym in the hall, for example.
Go into the French slums to get the wash houses where people get down laundry and other things.
Do you feel the same way?
I feel the same way.
How about the prisons, then?
How did you get that?
I went to the prisons.
Santa Rita.
Santa Rita has been replaced by a modern jail.
But when I was there, it was the old Santa Rita.
The doors were not barred.
They were solid slabs of wood like a hatch on a ship.
And the ceilings were wire, wire mesh, so you could hear everything that went on in the place.
And, you know, I was just there.
I couldn't sit there for the day and watch all this stuff take place.
I went there to, I think, to visit a friend who was in Santa Rita.
And I later had a chance to interview him and several other former inmates of Santa Rita.
And they'd tell me all this stuff about, you know, the rap sessions at night and the homosexual rapes and... The masturbation.
The masturbation, which I... In fact, one guy told me it was exactly the phrase he used to...
If the guys get masturbated on my way, that place would have been ripped up out of the earth and turned over.
Well, I was at an aircraft carrier for three years, and there was a guy who said, it's crude, but he said, I drift off in the shower so much that now every time it wakes, I get a higher on.
I mean, it's prison.
You know, going to prison is a lot like going to sea in a ship, only in a ship you'll be out of danger of drowning.
We've got to talk about Conrad, because a number of the reviewers have said, and I do agree with him on this, that you play him straight.
I mean, he treated him with the utmost respect and sensitivity, and I mean, he is not the object of any kind of
You're not smiling at him.
He's really a unique character, may I say.
I want him to be someone who has had everything flipped away.
He's really going to affect a lot of his life.
He has no more interest than you now than you can say it all.
It is intermediate.
It's obvious.
Such is the case.
He's not coming back after the first day.
The parents were useless.
He doesn't have a circle of friends.
He just moved to the fifth place, fifth place, California, which is a kind of place he was going to live in.
It was a very, very good place.
I went out there to see him.
And I also wanted him to be a member of the first generation after God.
I get this concept from one of the books written, a novel by Douglas Copeland, and the title is Life After God.
His insight was wonderful.
This is the first book.
The Generation X, as he also gave it that name.
Generation X. That was his first book.
Yes.
That was his first book.
And Life After God, I didn't see much about it.
It's a wonderful book.
It's about the people whose own parents didn't believe in God.
So how are they going to believe in God?
And as in Conrad's case, they didn't even know what prayer was.
Conrad stopped praying for this and didn't know what to do.
Um, that, that whole idea intrigued me to, you have someone, everything's been stripped away, you have no religion.
Um, see how you can cope with the, with the, with the situation and by the stroke of luck.
I'm looking for that, by the way.
Uh, he orders a, a book called The Stoic's Game, and you get a book called The Stoic's.
Yeah.
But, it, it coincides that, at least,
These are factors in life, and people say, well, it's a coincidence.
But life revolves around so many coincidences.
I thought that was a pretty believable thing.
I think so.
In the jail, you only get books from a publisher.
I know that.
Stephen Blumberg, my book thief, the only way we could send him the book was my publisher had to send him the book in prison.
I couldn't inscribe a copy and send it to him.
He had to send a copy from Holt.
I'd forgotten that case, but that was quite funny.
Yeah.
But it was just the same thing.
They had it sent in.
They had it come from the publishing house.
I'm sorry.
And one of the inmates told me about this one guy that I was talking to, I was talking to him, the first one saying that it was so rotten in that jail, he took this book and ripped the covers off it and gave him the face.
plotted a bunch of folios, and, uh, and his princess.
Oh, man, I wish I could get my hands on the book covers.
You know, you could make it into a good, a good shank, yeah.
I don't know, I just loved all that.
And then when you had stuff like that, again, it's, uh... Are you taking notes when you're doing this, or you pretty much... Most of this I did not take notes on the, uh, scene.
I was, as soon as I could get alone,
I always thought that a lot of the stuff was sensitive and taking notes and just upset people.
As soon as I had a chance to sit down, I'd write.
Am I pretty much just my time up to 30?
No, but I think about a few years arriving, so I'm going to go down and tell me to stay at the mall for a little bit.
Good.
You think you're like 5 to 5 or 5 to 10 to 10 to 10 to 10 to 10 to 10 to 10 to 10 to 10 to 10.
Is this the case in that you describe certain political things in Atlanta about buying votes and stuff like this?
Well, I couldn't get it on T on the Square, too, but that's my best knowledge.
And apparently it's true everywhere.
When we talk about this get-out-the-vote money, it's not to hire sound trucks.
Do you see a movie coming out of this?
I really don't, because two producers, and I know them both,
I've shaken their heads that they can't think of any way to do it in even three hours.
And actually I will not cut my wrist if there's no movie deal because the last debacle, the last one such a debacle that kind of turned me off of it.
It's hard to do it.
I can see where it would take five to eight hours to do this.
If you're doing the whole thing, there's so many flops in the evening.
Do you have a sense of, and at least this is a big word, and when I ask an author about the I'd prepare career and the corpus and how this fits in, is it, for you, a body of work that absolutely follows?
Well, there was a long recession in the continuum in 1987.
Well, I think so.
To me, writing fiction still has a novelty about it.
I get an awful lot of nonfiction and enjoy it and do think that literary nonfiction is probably the most important
movement since the Second World War, particularly since the novel has become more and more precious.
There's a novelist who has a new book that's done called Thumbsuckers.
It's about a man who sucks his thumb until the age of 21, and he was an author himself, sucks his thumb until he was 19.
And I kind of think of
What is being done generally in the novel today is thumb-sucking, the thumb-sucking novel, in which having cannibalized the first 20-yard years of your life, you begin finally to suck your thumb.
I mean, because that sort of hopes that there's something left on your bones that you might turn into fiction.
Now, this is a traditional novel?
This is a... In terms of structure?
This is a traditional 19th-century novel.
That's what I was about to say.
It's a traditional 19th-century novel, and yet...
And yet, people are responding by the hundreds of thousands.
That's because there are certain laws that you can break only into apparel.
The realism I did was developing the novel, it was a very recent thing.
It only goes back to the 18th century.
And you finally get up into the 19th century.
It's fairly late that you get novels with a point of view where you look through a character's eyes.
And even Zola doesn't have your point of view.
You can get kind of split, split his in and out.
Henry James puts forth the notion that every scene should be true.
Somebody's.
All right.
It's a good lesson.
But we're talking about a relatively short span of time.
And then by the late, by the end of the 19th century, really when I've been really, I couldn't say really, been truly about
into a powerful, powerful form.
For a novelist of the 20th century, to give up realism—I mean, when we started doing it in this country, in the second part of the century—to give up realism, there's just an engineer where to say, look, I'm tired of this whole business of electricity.
It's been done to death.
My God, the electric bulb was invented in 1879, or whatever.
And I'm going to push into the future.
I'm not going to use it.
No more electricity for me."
Well, this poor guy would be doomed to pay, because electricity gets down to something so basic in a computational matter that you can't advance physics without it.
Well, it's the same thing with realism and literature, according to my concern.
That has given literature a power that has never been, and cannot be used to have.
for a technical reason, for what kind of literature does, is jogging humor.
You know, try to describe in the woods a face.
It's a terrible mess.
You have a lot of those effortlessly.
So you have to do what Solzhenitsyn, for example, does.
It had a face that looked like it had been stamped on by a pole.
It just gives you an idea of what this face looked like.
But the Richard Reed memories that you can evoke, more complex, the Richard Reed
the greater the impact of the writing and the rich of the picture that you're reading yet.
This is a technical reason why you cannot give up realism without giving up the power of the novel.
Unfortunately, or unfortunately for me, I'm the only person who seems to understand this very basic, simple fact.
And I used to worry about handing other writers to Jesus' opinions, you know.
But I see now there's a lot to worry about.
They're all, uh, they're all wed to some sucking.
They were going to these interviews, and you say, well, I think I know my lead, and I don't want to leave until that, but I don't like to leave until I have my kicker, you know, and I think you just gave me the kicker.
You had, are you confident about, I mean, can you give me a quote for the future?
I mean, just one other thing, that I don't, you sound like I just, you know, I'm the whole balding in this.
There are writers that I admire, and particularly Richard Price, Falkers and Freedom Land.
He's gone out like a reporter.
He's got a fabulous,
We talked about race, black and white.
The blue blood blacks, very interesting.
And I think that's an important type of material for a novel, and I think he's not ever brought up anymore.
And when you talk about the architecture, you should really, you know, why does architecture have to be black or white, or the, you know... But getting it right is very important to you, isn't it?
I mean, you know, retrospectively, the nuances... And this really is an example of where the novel does give you a... I mean, it's been said, Bonfire is the best book
about the 1980s that you're going to read, fact or fiction.
I mean, I don't think any book is going to describe that madness that went on down in that part of the island better than that novel.
I mean, but is this a function of the novel in your view?
It is, in my view, and when you said that, it made me think of John P. Marquand, his sociological picture of, you've referred
in Massachusetts.
He's really better than W. L. Warner's sociological question, although Warner was quite okay.
Can help being a native southerner in this book?
Probably.
I was, I think I had somewhat of an ear for the way it was spoken, even though it was not exactly the way it was spoken in Virginia.
But I had to learn an awful lot about Atlanta nonetheless because Atlanta is a sort of New South that I've never seen.
And yet it's not a really old, as you point out, which I wasn't aware of.
It's not one of these old traditional cities.
It's really a development of the last 150 years or something like that.
And these plantations are not old family enterprises.
A new set of entrepreneurs comes through every cycle and starts
And from the stock market to real estate, that was a, that was really a... Now that was a fairly, I must say, I had the notion fairly early of meeting, having a real estate figure and everything.
The two great engines that drove the economy in the 80s were investment banking, which is basically mainly a bond business in, in real estate development.
I started to think in 89 when the, well, the impact of the deep concession of 87 to 96 hadn't really been felt yet.
It was by late 80 and 90, there was a lot of trimming when we developed or something was happening.
And then the next 90, it was, they started hitting about it.
So those two things.
went hand-in-hand, but I was certainly in the midst of unbridled wealth.
Of course, you can hear a few things out of Atlanta.
Is there any anxiety about what people might think or who's who?
No, I'm looking forward to my trip trip line.
I'm going, I think it's the 17th and 18th of this month.
There was a
review of the Journal Constitution, although it did, it did acknowledge my accurate picture of the city.
It said that I had made the, the black leadership kind of too enlightened and too statement-like.
Well, I don't quite get that complaint, because in this the black mayor,
called the press conference in order to announce a virtual crisis which didn't exist.
It didn't even exist, sir.
I don't... It seems to me that is not exactly where... Let me describe this with you.
And that's the competition.
Okay.
Sorry, I've had my out.
It was great.
Did you have fun with this, by the way?
Did you have fun doing this book?
I did.
No, I was doing a break on this.
Atlanta was exciting.
And what's next?
Another novel?
Yeah, a novel on education.
Really?
Yeah.
Set in any particular place?
No, I haven't.
I don't even know what branch... I'll be done in two seconds.
I don't even know what branch is the education, whether it'll be a school, high school, cut school, college, or all three.
But I'll say page 33 here.
I was going to get a nice fresh one and have you do that.
I said, no, I treasure this one more.
This has been great.
Thanks a lot.
And I'm doing this from an awful lot of publications, you know, Philadelphia Inquirer, I do about 20 papers.
Oh, is that right?
I do a magazine piece, so we'll be doing that feature for a biblio.
So you have, you have, you're optimistic about the novel?
No, I'm not, unless—if young writers would take my very simple advice, I wouldn't have any worries at all.
But as long as they try to forsake realism, I don't see any hope.
So many young writers now are not writing.
They're going to film.
They're going to television.
A lot of money in the engine, I think.
Actually, it's also excitement, though, because this is where the action is.
But the novel remains imminent.
You can still do it all.
And do you, how long do you think it's going to take you to do this next novel?
Well, I, I, I've betrayed my own vows before, but I'm, will be desperately unhappy if I don't do this in three years.
A little bit.
I should have said that probably, but that's a little bit.
You know, it's about the art.
I can tell stories on art more than I can.
Yeah, I want art.
Oh, is that right?
They're talking about paintings?
No, they're talking about pictures for the newspapers.
Ah.
That's a whole newspaper term.
What kind of art have you got?
Oh, that's fine, yeah.
They might have colored pictures to go with these stories.